Title: General Relativistic Magneto-Hydrodynamic Simulations with BAM: Implementation and Code Comparison
Authors: Anna Neuweiler, Tim Dietrich, Bernd Brügmann, Edoardo Giangrandi, Kenta Kiuchi, Federico Schianchi, Philipp Mösta, Swapnil Shankar, Bruno Giacomazzo, Masaru Shibata
Summary: Binary neutron star mergers are among the most energetic events in our
Universe, with magnetic fields significantly impacting their dynamics,
particularly after the merger. While numerical-relativity simulations that
correctly describe the physics are essential to model their rich phenomenology,
the inclusion of magnetic fields is crucial for realistic simulations. For this
reason, we have extended the BAM code to enable general relativistic
magneto-hydrodynamic (GRMHD) simulations employing a hyperbolic `divergence
cleaning' scheme. We present a large set of standard GRMHD tests and compare
the BAM code to other GRMHD codes, SPRITZ, GRaM-X, and SACRA$_{\rm KK22}$,
which employ different schemes for the evolution of the magnetic fields.
Overall, we find that the BAM code shows a good performance in simple
special-relativistic tests. In addition, we find good agreement and consistent
results when comparing GRMHD simulation results between BAM and SACRA$_{\rm
KK22}$.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20946v1
----
Title: Universal structure of islands in evaporating black holes
Authors: Yoshinori Matsuo
Summary: The entanglement entropy of the Hawking radiation contains contributions from
a region inside the black hole, which is called islands, implying that the
Hawking radiation contains the information of islands. The boundary of the
island is given by the quantum extremal surface, whose position is determined
so that the entanglement entropy is extremized. In many cases of stationary
black holes and a few cases of evaporating black holes, it was already
confirmed that the quantum extremal surface is located outside the horizon for
stationary black holes and is inside the horizon for evaporating black holes.
In this paper, we calculate islands in general black holes and show that the
island extends to the outside of the horizon for stationary black holes but is
hidden inside the horizon for evaporating black holes independent of details of
the black hole.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20921v1
----
Title: An Analysis of a 2x2 Keyfitz-Kranzer Type Balance System with Varying Generalized Chaplygin Gas
Authors: Jack Frew, Nigel Keyser, Ethan Kim, Griffin Paddock, Camden Toumbleston, Sara Wilson, Charis Tsikkou
Summary: We consider a system of two balance laws of Keyfitz-Kranzer type with varying
generalized Chaplygin gas, which exhibits negative pressure and is a product of
a function of time and the inverse of a power of the density. The Chaplygin gas
is a fluid designed to accommodate measurements for the early universe and
late-time universal expansion while obeying the pressure-density-time relation.
We produce an explanation and description of the non-self-similar Riemann
solutions, including the non-classical singular solutions. We also find that
due to a direct dependence on time, a change in the regions allowing for
combinations of classical and non-classical singular solutions occurs,
therefore a Riemann solution can have different solutions over several time
intervals. Our findings are confirmed numerically using the local
Lax-Friederichs scheme.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20869v1
----
Title: Exceptional point and hysteresis in perturbations of Kerr black holes
Authors: João Paulo Cavalcante, Maurício Richartz, Bruno Carneiro da Cunha
Summary: We employ the isomonodromic method to study linear scalar massive
perturbations of Kerr black holes for generic scalar masses $M\mu$ and generic
black hole spins $a/M$. A degeneracy between the longest-living quasinormal
mode and the first overtone is found for $(M\mu)_c \simeq 0.3704981$ and
$(a/M)_c\simeq 0.9994660$. We show that the longest-living mode and the first
overtone change continuously into each other as we vary the parameters around
the point of degeneracy, providing evidence for the existence of a geometric
phase around an exceptional point. We interpret our findings through a
thermodynamic analogy.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20850v1
----
Title: Quadrupole formulae with cosmological constant: comparison
Authors: Denis Dobkowski-Ryłko, Jerzy Lewandowski
Summary: We consider three different approaches (by Ashtekar, Bonga and Kesavan; Hoque
and Virmani; and Dobkowski-Ry\l{}ko and Lewandowski) to investigate
gravitational radiation produced by time changing matter source in de Sitter
spacetime. All of them lead to generalizations of the quadrupole formula,
however, due to different gauge conditions and choices of the hypersurfaces,
across which the energy flux is computed, it is nontrivial to see that they all
coincide, as one would expect from the symplectic theory. Each of the
expressions for the radiated energy in the form of gravitational waves is
expressed in terms of the mass and pressure quadrupole moments and written
explicitly up to the linear order in $\sqrt{\Lambda}$, or equvalently in Hubble
parameter $H$. It is shown that up to the first order all three of the
generalizations of the quadrupole formula agree.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20800v1
----
Title: Phase Transition Dynamics of Black Holes Influenced by Kaniadakis and Barrow Statistics
Authors: Jafar Sadeghi, Mohammad Ali S. Afshar, Mohammad Reza Alipour, Saeed Noori Gashti
Summary: In this study, we investigate the dynamics and frame-by-frame phase
transition of the first order in black hole thermodynamics. For our analysis,
we will utilize the Kramers escape rate. Our focus is on charged anti-de Sitter
(AdS) black holes influenced by Kaniadakis and Barrow statistics. The selection
of these black holes aims to examine the effects of entropy variation on the
dynamics of phase transition and to demonstrate that the Kramers escape rate,
as an efficient tool, can effectively represent the dynamic transition from a
small to a large black hole within the domain of first-order phase transitions.
It is noteworthy that while the transition from small to large black holes
should ostensibly dominate the entire process, our results indicate that the
escape rate undergoes changes as it passes through the midpoint of the phase
transition, leading to a reverse escape phenomenon. The findings suggest that
the dynamic phase transition in charged AdS black holes affected by entropy
change bears a significant resemblance to the outcomes of models influenced by
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy\cite{23}. This similarity in results could serve as
an additional motivation to further explore the potential capabilities of
Kaniadakis and Barrow statistics in related cosmological fields. These
capabilities could enhance our understanding of other cosmological properties
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20779v1
----
Title: Quasinormal modes of rapidly rotating Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet-dilaton black holes
Authors: Jose Luis Blázquez-Salcedo, Fech Scen Khoo, Burkhard Kleihaus, Jutta Kunz
Summary: Quasinormal modes of rapidly rotating black holes are crucial in
understanding the ringdown phase after a merger. While for Kerr black holes
these modes have been known for a long time, their calculation has remained a
challenge in alternative theories of gravity. We obtain the spectrum of
quasinormal modes of rapidly rotating black holes in
Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet-dilaton theory without resorting to perturbation theory
in the coupling constant. Our approach is based on a spectral decomposition of
the linear perturbations of the metric and the scalar field. The quasinormal
modes approach smoothly the slow rotation and weak coupling limits known from
perturbative studies.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20760v1
----
Title: Hamiltonian formulation for scalar model of spontaneous spacetime symmetry violation in gravity
Authors: João Victor V. Santos, Marco Schreck
Summary: The focus of this article is on a modification of General Relativity (GR)
governed by a dynamical scalar field. The latter is able to acquire a nonzero
spacetime-dependent vacuum expectation value, which gives rise to a spontaneous
violation of spacetime symmetries. Based on the (3+1) decomposition, we
demonstrate how to develop the Hamiltonian formulation for this model. Having
done so, our primary interest is to understand how spontaneous spacetime
symmetry violation manifests itself in such a setting. In particular, we find
that the constraint structure of GR is preserved, although the constraints are
clearly modified by the scalar background field. These results emphasize the
beauty of spontaneous spacetime symmetry violation in gravity from the
viewpoint of the Hamiltonian formulation. They may pose the base for further
studies of more sophisticated models of vector and higher-rank tensor fields.
Moreover, the description developed can bear fruits when applied within
phenomenological quests for spacetime symmetry violation in gravity, in
particular, at cosmological scales.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20688v1
----
Title: Quantum and thermal pressures from light scalar fields
Authors: Hauke Fischer, Christian Käding, Mario Pitschmann
Summary: Light scalar fields play a variety of roles in modern physics, especially in
cosmology and modified theories of gravity. For this reason, there is a zoo of
experiments actively trying to find evidence for many scalar field models that
have been proposed in theoretical considerations. Among those are setups in
which the pressures expected to be induced by light scalar fields between two
parallel plates are studied, for example, Casimir force experiments. While it
is known that classical and quantum pressures caused by light scalar fields
could have significant impacts on such experiments, in this article, we show
that this can also be the case for thermal pressure. More specifically, we
derive expressions for the quantum and thermal pressures induced by exchanges
of light scalar field fluctuations between two thin parallel plates. As
particular examples, we then look at screened scalar fields. For chameleon,
symmetron and environment-dependent dilaton models, we find large regions in
their parameter spaces that allow for thermal pressures to equal or exceed the
quantum pressures. By comparing with earlier constraints from quantum pressure
calculations, we conclude that thermal pressures induced by chameleons are
actually of experimental significance.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20658v1
----
Title: Attractive gravity probe surface in Einstein-Maxwell system
Authors: Kangjae Lee, Keisuke Izumi, Tetsuya Shiromizu, Hirotaka Yoshino, Yoshimune Tomikawa
Summary: We derive areal inequalities for five types of attractive gravity probe
surfaces, which were proposed by us in order to characterize the strength of
gravity in different ways including weak gravity region, taking into account of
contributions of electric and magnetic charges, angular momentum, gravitational
waves, and matters. These inequalities are generalizations of the Riemannian
Penrose inequality for minimal surfaces, and lead to the concept of extremality
for a given surface whose condition is given in terms of the gravitational mass
and the electromagnetic charges. This means that the extremality is a
characteristic property not only of black hole horizons or minimal surfaces but
also of surfaces in weak gravity region. We also derive areal inequalities and
extremality conditions for surfaces in asymptotically locally anti-de Sitter
spacetimes.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20636v1
----
Title: Four $\mathbb{S}\mathbb{T}\mathbb{U}$ Black Holes Shadows
Authors: Yassine Sekhmani, Dhruba Jyoti Gogoi, Ratbay Myrzakulov, Giuseppe Gaetano Luciano, Javlon Rayimbaev
Summary: In this work, we examine the optical behaviors and thermodynamic phase
structures using shadow analysis for four $\mathbb{S}\mathbb{T}\mathbb{U}$
black holes. The study is conducted for four cases of charge configurations on
the parameter space $\mathcal{M}\left(q_1,q_2,q_3,q_4\right)$. As a matter of
fact, both the electric charge as a parameter and the parameter space
$\mathcal{M}\left(q_1,q_2,q_3,q_4\right)$ affect the geometry of the black hole
shadow, particularly the size of the shadow. We also introduce a constraint on
the charge of the black hole from the observational results of the M87$^\star$
{\color{black}and Sgr A$^\star$} shadow. Furthermore, we show that the electric
charge and the parameter space $\mathcal{M}\left(q_1,q_2,q_3,q_4\right)$ have a
non-trivial impact on the variation of the energy emission rate. Interestingly
enough, we find novel scenarios in which the evaporation is slower, which
causes the lifetime of the black holes to be considerably elongated. On the
other side, the phase structure of four $\mathbb{S}\mathbb{T}\mathbb{U}$ black
holes is explored for two cases of electric charge configuration. The findings
show a perfect correlation between the shadow and event horizon radii. This
correlation is, in fact, helpful in discovering the phase transition in terms
of the shadow radius. In addition, the microstructure is being analyzed in
terms of shadow analysis, providing similar behavior to the ordinary situation
of the Ruppeiner formalism.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20621v1
----
Title: Comprehensive Study of Bouncing Cosmological Models in $f(Q,T)$ Theory
Authors: M. Zeeshan Gul, M. Sharif, Shamraiza Shabbir
Summary: The main objective of this article is to investigate the viability of
bouncing cosmological scenarios using different forms of scale factors with
perfect matter configuration in the framework of extended symmetric
teleparallel theory. This modified proposal is defined by the function
$f(Q,T)$, where $Q$ characterizes non-metricity and $T$ denotes the trace of
energy-momentum tensor. We investigate the modified field equations of this
theory using different parametric values of the Hubble parameter and
non-metricity to derive viable solutions. These solutions are relevant in
various cosmological bounce models such as symmetric-bounce, super-bounce,
oscillatory-bounce, matter-bounce and exponential-bounce models. Furthermore,
we examine the behavior of energy density and pressure to analyze the
characteristics of dark energy. A comprehensive analysis is also conducted to
explore the behavior of the equation of state parameter and deceleration
parameter to examine the evolutionary eras of the cosmos. Our findings show
that the $f(Q,T)$ gravity describes the cosmic expansion in the vicinity of the
bouncing point during the early and late times of cosmic evolution.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20605v1
----
Title: Ray Tracing Through Absorbing Dielectric Media in the Schwarzschild Spacetime
Authors: Adam Rogers
Summary: General Relativity describes the trajectories of light-rays through curved
spacetime near a massive object. In addition to gravitational lensing, we
include an absorbing dielectric medium given by a complex refractive index
known as the Drude model. When absorption is included the eikonal becomes
complex, with the imaginary part related to the absorption along a ray between
emission and observation points. We extend results from the literature to
include dispersion in the index of refraction. The complex Hamiltonian splits
into a real part that describes the equations of motion and a constraint
equation that governs the momentum loss in the system. We work in coordinates
which are fully real, with a real metric in physical spacetime. We assume the
dust and plasma distributions of the Drude matter to coincide and vary as a
power-law $1/r^h$. We find that transmission requires $h>1$, otherwise
exponential absorption occurs along ray paths. We use ray-tracing through
strongly absorbing matter near the surface of the compact star, as well as
specializing to a point-lens in the weak-field limit with weakly absorbing
matter to generate potentially observable light curves for distant observers.
In the appropriate limits, our theory reproduces results from the literature.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20567v1
----
Title: The Kramers escape rate of phase transitions for the 6-dimensional Gauss-Bonnet AdS black hole with triple phases
Authors: Chen Ma, Pan-Pan Zhang, Bin Wu, Zhen-Ming Xu
Summary: In this study, we obtain specific picture of the phase transitions for the
6-dimensional Gauss-Bonnet Anti-de Sitter (AdS) black hole with triple phases,
using the generalized free energy we constructed and Kramers escape rate in
stochastic motion. There are six possible phase transition processes between
the three different stable states (small, medium, and large black hole states).
During these phase transitions, there are two key temperatures. One is the
temperature at which the medium black hole state emerges, and the other is the
temperature at which the small black hole state annihilates. Meanwhile, two
dynamic equilibrium processes are formed. One is a dynamic equilibrium of the
transition from the medium black hole state to the large black hole state and
the transition from the small black hole state to the medium black hole state.
The other is a dynamic equilibrium of the transition from the small black hole
state to the medium black hole state and the transition from the medium black
hole state to the small black hole state.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20512v1
----
Title: The NANOGrav 15 yr data set: Posterior predictive checks for gravitational-wave detection with pulsar timing arrays
Authors: Gabriella Agazie, Akash Anumarlapudi, Anne M. Archibald, Zaven Arzoumanian, Jeremy George Baier, Paul T. Baker, Bence Bécsy, Laura Blecha, Adam Brazier, Paul R. Brook, Sarah Burke-Spolaor, J. Andrew Casey-Clyde, Maria Charisi, Shami Chatterjee, Katerina Chatziioannou, Tyler Cohen, James M. Cordes, Neil J. Cornish, Fronefield Crawford, H. Thankful Cromartie, Kathryn Crowter, Megan E. DeCesar, Paul B. Demorest, Heling Deng, Lankeswar Dey, Timothy Dolch, Elizabeth C. Ferrara, William Fiore, Emmanuel Fonseca, Gabriel E. Freedman, Emiko C. Gardiner, Nate Garver-Daniels, Peter A. Gentile, Kyle A. Gersbach, Joseph Glaser, Deborah C. Good, Kayhan Gültekin, Jeffrey S. Hazboun, Ross J. Jennings, Aaron D. Johnson, Megan L. Jones, Andrew R. Kaiser, David L. Kaplan, Luke Zoltan Kelley, Matthew Kerr, Joey S. Key, Nima Laal, Michael T. Lam, William G. Lamb, Bjorn Larsen, T. Joseph W. Lazio, Natalia Lewandowska, Tingting Liu, Duncan R. Lorimer, Jing Luo, Ryan S. Lynch, Chung-Pei Ma, Dustin R. Madison, Alexander McEwen, James W. McKee, Maura A. McLaughlin, Natasha McMann, Bradley W. Meyers, Patrick M. Meyers, Chiara M. F. Mingarelli, Andrea Mitridate, Cherry Ng, David J. Nice, Stella Koch Ocker, Ken D. Olum, Timothy T. Pennucci, Benetge B. P. Perera, Nihan S. Pol, Henri A. Radovan, Scott M. Ransom, Paul S. Ray, Joseph D. Romano, Jessie C. Runnoe, Alexander Saffer, Shashwat C. Sardesai, Ann Schmiedekamp, Carl Schmiedekamp, Kai Schmitz, Brent J. Shapiro-Albert, Xavier Siemens, Joseph Simon, Magdalena S. Siwek, Sophia V. Sosa Fiscella, Ingrid H. Stairs, Daniel R. Stinebring, Kevin Stovall, Abhimanyu Susobhanan, Joseph K. Swiggum, Stephen R. Taylor, Jacob E. Turner, Caner Unal, Michele Vallisneri, Sarah J. Vigeland, Haley M. Wahl, Caitlin A. Witt, David Wright, Olivia Young
Summary: Pulsar-timing-array experiments have reported evidence for a stochastic
background of nanohertz gravitational waves consistent with the signal expected
from a population of supermassive--black-hole binaries. Those analyses assume
power-law spectra for intrinsic pulsar noise and for the background, as well as
a Hellings--Downs cross-correlation pattern among the
gravitational-wave--induced residuals across pulsars. These assumptions are
idealizations that may not be realized in actuality. We test them in the
NANOGrav 15 yr data set using Bayesian posterior predictive checks: after
fitting our fiducial model to real data, we generate a population of simulated
data-set replications, and use them to assess whether the optimal-statistic
significance, inter-pulsar correlations, and spectral coefficients assume
extreme values for the real data when compared to the replications. We confirm
that the NANOGrav 15 yr data set is consistent with power-law and
Hellings--Downs assumptions. We also evaluate the evidence for the stochastic
background using posterior-predictive versions of the frequentist optimal
statistic and of Bayesian model comparison, and find comparable significance
(3.2\ $\sigma$ and 3\ $\sigma$ respectively) to what was previously reported
for the standard statistics. We conclude with novel visualizations of the
reconstructed gravitational waveforms that enter the residuals for each pulsar.
Our analysis strengthens confidence in the identification and characterization
of the gravitational-wave background as reported by NANOGrav.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20510v1
----
Title: Linear-Quadratic GUP and Thermodynamic Dimensional Reduction
Authors: H. Ramezani, K. Nozari
Summary: In this paper we investigate the statistical mechanics within the
Linear-Quadratic GUP (LQGUP, i.e, GUP with linear and quadratic terms in
momentum) models in the semiclassical regime. Then, some thermodynamic
properties of a system of 3-dimensional harmonic oscillators are investigated
by calculating the deformed partition functions. According to the equipartition
theorem, we show that the number of accessible microstates decreases sharply in
the very high temperatures regime. When the thermal de Broglie wavelength is of
the order of the Planck length, three degrees of freedom are frozen in this
setup. In other words, it is observed that there is an effective reduction of
the degrees of freedom from 6 to 3 for a system of 3D harmonic oscillators in
this framework. The calculations are carried out using both approximate
analytical and exact numerical methods. The results of the analytical method
are also presented in the form of thermal wavelengths for better understanding.
Finally, the case of a 2-dimensional harmonic is treated as another example to
comprehend the results, leading to a reduction of the degrees of freedom from 4
to 2.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20497v1
----
Title: Mixmaster Universe in a 2D non-commutative GUP framework
Authors: Sebastiano Segreto, Giovanni Montani
Summary: In this work, we examine the dynamical aspects of the cosmological Mixmaster
model within the framework of non-commutative generalized uncertainty principle
(GUP) theories. The theory is formulated classically by introducing a
well-defined symplectic form that differs from the ordinary one, thereby
inducing a general deformation of the Poisson brackets describing a precise
class of GUP theories. In this general setting, we first investigate the
behavior of the Bianchi I and Bianchi II models using Misner variables. Then,
we study the Bianchi IX model in the Mixmaster approximation, which is
well-known for accurately reproducing the dynamics of the point-particle
Universe approaching the cosmological singularity. We derive the corresponding
Belinsky-Khalatnikov-Lifshitz (BKL) map and then, by selecting a specific GUP
model associated with string theory, we explicitly investigate its resulting
features shaped by the non-commutative GUP scheme. Our findings reveal that the
chaotic and ergodic behavior typically observed in the standard BKL map, which
characterizes the point-Universe's approach to the singularity, is replaced by
quasi-periodic orbits in the parameter space of the theory. This corresponds to
an oscillatory behavior of the Universe's scale factors, dependent on the
initial conditions.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20476v1
----
Title: Automated determination of the end time of junk radiation in binary black hole simulations
Authors: Isabella G. Pretto, Mark A. Scheel, Saul A. Teukolsky
Summary: When numerically solving Einstein's equations for the evolution of binary
black holes, physical imperfections in the initial data manifest as a
transient, high-frequency pulse of ''junk radiation.'' This unphysical signal
must be removed before the waveform can be used. Improvements in the efficiency
of numerical simulations now allow waveform catalogs containing thousands of
waveforms to be produced. Thus, an automated procedure for identifying junk
radiation is required. To this end, we present a new algorithm based on the
empirical mode decomposition (EMD) from the Hilbert-Huang transform. This
approach allows us to isolate and measure the high-frequency oscillations
present in the measured irreducible masses of the black holes. The decay of
these oscillations allows us to estimate the time from which the junk radiation
can be ignored. To make this procedure more precise, we propose three distinct
threshold criteria that specify how small the contribution of junk radiation
has to be before it can be considered negligible. We apply this algorithm to
3403 BBH simulations from the SXS catalog to find appropriate values for the
thresholds in the three criteria. We find that this approach yields reliable
decay time estimates, i.e., when to consider the simulation physical, for over
98.6% of the simulations studied. This demonstrates the efficacy of the EMD as
a suitable tool to automatically isolate and characterize junk radiation in the
simulation of binary black hole systems.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20470v1
----
