Title: Quantum Gravity Corrections to Hawking Radiation via GUP
Authors: Gaurav Bhandari, S. D. Pathak, Manabendra Sharma, Maxim Yu Khlopov
Summary: In this paper we explore the effects of a Generalized Uncertainty Principle
(GUP) on Schwarzschild black hole. In particular, we incorporate the effects of
GUP into the Parikh-Wilczek tunneling process for Hawking radiation. To this
effect, we observe that results obtained due to GUP correction resemble that of
the Reissner-Nordstr\"{om} black hole, showing similarities to the nature of an
electric charge. We also find that, within this framework, the emission is not
purely thermal, thus addressing the information loss problem through the
correlation function.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19268v1
----
Title: Reduced geometry and its role in explicit spacetime symmetry violation
Authors: Carlos M. Reyes, César Riquelme, Marco Schreck, Alex Soto
Summary: The incompatibility of explicit diffeomorphism violation with Riemannian
geometry within the gravitational Standard-Model Extension (SME) is revisited.
We review two methods of how to deal with this problem. The first is based on
an approach proposed originally by St\"{u}ckelberg and the latter is to
restrict spacetime geometry via the dynamical field equations and the second
Bianchi identity. Moreover, a third technique is introduced, which is novel and
relies on isometries of a gravitational system. Our conclusion is that an SME
background field configuration compatible with Riemannian geometry is more
likely to be determined the more diffeomorphisms are isometries of the
particular system. This finding has the potential to provide an alternative
treatment of explicit spacetime symmetry violation in gravity.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19264v1
----
Title: Solutions of Friedmann's Equations and Cosmological Consequences
Authors: Yisong Yang
Summary: The Einstein equations of general relativity reduce, when the spacetime
metric is of the Friedmann--Lemaitre--Robertson--Walker type governing an
isotropic and homogeneous universe, to the Friedmann equations, which is a set
of nonlinear ordinary differential equations, determining the law of evolution
of the spatial scale factor, in terms of the Hubble ``constant''.
  It is a challenging task, not always possible, to solve these equations. In
this talk, we present some insights from solving and analyzing the Friedmann
equations and their implications to evolutionary cosmology. In particular, in
the Chaplygin fluid universe, we derive a universal formula for the asymptotic
exponential growth rate of the scale factor which indicates that, as far as
there is a tiny presence of nonlinear (exotic) matter, linear (conventional)
matter makes contribution to the dark energy, which becomes significant near
the phantom divide line. Joint work with Shouxin Chen, Gary W. Gibbons, and
Yijun Li.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19250v1
----
