Title: Ultra-light dark matter with non-canonical kinetics reopening the mass window
Authors: Shiyun Lu, Amara Ilyas, Xiao-Han Ma, Bo Wang, Dongdong Zhang, Yi-Fu Cai
Summary: Fuzzy dark matter (FDM) with mass around $10^{-22}$ eV is viewed as a
promising paradigm in understanding the structure formation of the local
universe at small scales. Recent observations, however, begin to challenge FDM
in return. We focus on the arguments between the solution to CDM small-scale
curiosities and recent observations on matter power spectrum, and find its
implication on an earlier formation of small-scale structure. In this article,
we propose a scheme of k-ULDM scalar field with a differently-evolving sound
speed, thanks to the non-canonical kinetics. With the help of the
Dirac-Born-Infeld (DBI) theory, we illustrate to change the behavior of the
quantum pressure term countering collapse, therefore change the history of
structure growth. We find that it can truly reopen the ULDM mass window closed
by the Lyman-$\alpha$ problem. We will discuss such examples in this paper,
while more possibilities remain to be explored.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19521v1
----
Title: Tidal forces in collapsing compact objects
Authors: Ashok B. Joshi, Dipanjan Dey, Pankaj S. Joshi, Vivekkumar R. Tank
Summary: In this work, we investigate tidal forces in the Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi (LTB)
metric, focusing on both hidden and locally visible singularities. We discuss
the strength of these singularities in terms of deformationally strong
singularities. Specifically, we analyze tidal forces in LTB spacetime,
calculating radial and angular tidal forces and Jacobi fields for the radially
co-moving shell. To provide a comparative study, we consider both homogeneous
and inhomogeneous cases. The matter field distribution at one-time slice can
differ significantly from another, highlighting the potential for
time-dependent tidal deformation as a distinct observational signature. We
focus on a specific feature: the time-varying maximum of stretching in the
radial tidal force, which we term the "critical tidal boundary." In the
inhomogeneous case, close to singularity time ($t<t_{s}$), the magnitudes of
tidal forces vary substantially, with significant differences in compressive
and stretching forces within a small physical radius $R(t,r)$. The resulting
singularity in the LTB metrics at the end state of gravitational collapse
appears to be an Ori-strong singularity, characterized by infinite tidal
deformation.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19508v1
----
Title: Higgs Mechanism for the Ashtekar Self-Dual Connection
Authors: Bruno Alexandre
Summary: We introduce the Higgs mechanism for the self-dual spin connection (also
known as the Ashtekar connection), using the Pleba\'{n}ski formulation of
gravity. We develop our formalism within the framework of the chiral action and
derive the equations of motion of the theory. One particular test model is
explored: since anisotropy is an intrinsic property of the theory, a modified
version of the spatially flat Bianchi I model with two different scale factors
is considered. We apply our formalism and derive the Friedmann equations which
regulate the scale factors and the Higgs field. We also present a Proca-like
term for the connection, which when reduced to minisuperspace with a positive
$\Lambda$ yields a De Sitter universe with the solution scaled by a constant
that depends on the mass of the gauge fields. We finally investigate the effect
of these mass terms on gravitational waves and find that the wave equation
remains unchanged relatively to GR; however the Weyl tensor is scaled by a
constant which depends on the mass of the connection components.
Link: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19363v1
----
